Hi friends
In this video we are going to discuss about recursion in C
So basically a recursive function is a
function calling itself here
We can see a function fun is calling
itself Now let us discuss the basic rules of recursion
The first rule is that recursive function
should call itself see fun is calling itself
the next rule is a very important one
The recursive function should have a base case where it
doesn't make any further recursive calls that is it
should not result in an infinite loop
At some point it should stop calling itself
If we assume N=5 we can return
from this loop when an equal to one
Since we are calling function using function(N-1)
the recursive calls will be function(5) function(4)
function(3) Function(2) and ends in
function(1)
We need to define the base case based on the
situation. next rule is that all the recursive calls should
align towards the base case here base case is N=1
and we are calling the function using N-1
So the recursive calls will be function(5)
function(4)
function(3)
function(2) and ends in function(1)
But if we call the function using N+1
the reclusive calls will be function(6)
Function(7)
Function(8) and so on and it will never
end
So
recursive calls are not aligning towards the base case and
we shouldn't define the base case like this
Now let's see an example
Programme. A programme to find factorial of a number
using Recursion.
So if any problem can be divided into multiple smaller
versions of the same problem we can use recursive
approach to solve that problem
For example to find factorial(6)
It is actually 6 x 5 x 4 x 3 x 2 x 1
so first we can find six into five
which is 30 then multiple
30 with 4 we get 120 then 120 x 3
we get 360 then 360 x 2
we get 720 and finally 720 x1 we get 720
So we will use this logic in here so
we have the programme. The main function there we have
2 integer variables declared N and ans
And now we are reading the number to N suppose
3 is the input we got. Now it is stored in N
we have if N greater than or equal to zero
which is to avoid negative numbers and which is true
here
So we go inside and there we have
ans= factorial(N)
So the control goes to the function and there we
have if Nless than = 1 which is
wrong
So we have return N x factorial(N-1)
minus
So 3 x factorial(2)
So it is calling this function again by passing N
equal to two
Now one thing to understand here is that the function
calls will be created in the stack and after it
return the particular function will be cleared from the stack
So here we check If n less than =1
which is wrong
So we return N x factorial(1)
So again the function is called with N=1
Now when we check the if condition it is true
So it returns one to the calling function which is
factorial of two
So here this will be evaluated and 2 x 1
will be returned to calling function factorial(3) and
in factorial(3)
This return statement will now execute completely and return 3 x 2
which is 6 to main function and assign to ans
and it is printed
And finally the programme returns zero
Now let us discuss about stack overflow. In recursion
The new function calls will be created in stack memory
section as we just discussed
And if our function does not have any base case
it will keep on creating function calls in the stack
memory section and at some point in time the recursive
function calls overflows the stack memory section as it does
not have any stopping point
This can also happen when the recursive function call
does not align towards the base case
This is called a stack overflow in Recursion.
So that's all and thank you for watching this video